I've mentioned it a few times already,
but it's worth mentioning one more time.
Ansible, in the background,
is only executing shell commands over SSH.
In other words, Ansible is doing exactly what you or
I would have done to install and configure or move things around,
but it's doing it in a way that's blazing fast and repeatable.
If you think about it, Ansible could be used to
implement anything that a tutorial on the web can do.
Let's try one and see.
For instance, here's a tutorial that I have that sets up Apache and shows a Hello World.
We should be able to automate these instructions using Ansible.
We want to install the Apache2 package from apt-get.
We want to copy this HTML file into the right place,
and then when we're done, we should be able to go to our localhost,
and actually see Hello World.
Let's give it a try. Here I've got my HTML,
which will show us Hello World on the screen with an h1 tag,
and I've got some roles to help me accomplish this task.
I've got a prepare role and an Apache role.
These roles are stored in the folder called roles,
and of course, the name Apache matches the name of the role Apache.
Inside of that folder,
I've got a files folder and a tasks folder.
Of course, the index.html is the file that needs to be copied at the end of the tutorial,
and my main.yml inside of the tasks folder is actually the guts of my Apache role.
It's got two plays in it.
One is to install the Apache Web Server.
Notice here it is becoming true,
which means it's elevating the privileges for this command.
Basically it's going to say sudo apt-get in the background.
Here it's using the apt module,
just a little bit more maintainable and clean than using shell scripts.
I'm able to call out the Apache2 name,
and of course say that I want the latest and I do
want to go ahead and update the cache just in case it's changed,
especially since I've used the latest.
Another play here is installing the index page.
Here I'm using a module called copy.
I'm saying the source file is index.
Now you see here I don't have any absolute path or relative path,
I'm just saying index.html.
Ansible knows that since you're using a role,
it should look for files in the files folder.
We don't have to designate where these came from.
Then the destination is always going to be on the machine that Ansible is modifying,
so this is the folder in the remote machine,
if we were using a remote machine.
Let's take a look at the prepare role.
We've got two plays in here.
We've got one to update the apt packages,
and we also want to remove dependencies that are no longer needed.
We're going to auto-remove those with apt.
Of course, we just put all those together like glue,
right here in our playbook.
I'll have the ability to run the playbook from my command line.
When I run my playbook,
it's going to fail horribly.
Now I decided to actually run my playbook on my local machine.
Therefore, in order to run it,
I actually need to use sudo because I need elevated privileges.
This is running and installing Apache on my machine.
Then it's going to copy the HTML file to its right place,
and we should be able to see our Hello World in a web browser.
Let's take a look at our Hello World.
Hey, there's our Hello World.
We've essentially taken the instructions from this web tutorial,
and turn them into an Ansible playbook that can be
run thousands of times, reliably, and consistently.